<!-- page break -->

<!-- page break -->

Figure 1: Sketch of Docling's default processing pipeline. The inner part of the model pipeline is easily customizable and extensible.

<!-- generated beginning -->Picture description: In this image, we can see some text and images.<!-- generated end -->

<!-- image -->

licensing (e.g. pymupdf [7]), poor speed or unrecoverable quality issues, such as merged text cells across far-apart text tokens or table columns (pypdfium, PyPDF) [15, 14].

We therefore decided to provide multiple backend choices, and additionally open-source a custombuilt PDF parser, which is based on the low-level qpdf [4] library. It is made available in a separate package named docling-parse and powers the default PDF backend in Docling. As an alternative, we provide a PDF backend relying on pypdfium , which may be a safe backup choice in certain cases, e.g. if issues are seen with particular font encodings.

## 3.2 AI models

As part of Docling, we initially release two highly capable AI models to the open-source community, which have been developed and published recently by our team. The first model is a layout analysis model, an accurate object-detector for page elements [13]. The second model is TableFormer [12, 9], a state-of-the-art table structure recognition model. We provide the pre-trained weights (hosted on huggingface) and a separate package for the inference code as docling-ibm-models . Both models are also powering the open-access deepsearch-experience, our cloud-native service for knowledge exploration tasks.

## Layout Analysis Model

Our layout analysis model is an object-detector which predicts the bounding-boxes and classes of various elements on the image of a given page. Its architecture is derived from RT-DETR [16] and re-trained on DocLayNet [13], our popular human-annotated dataset for document-layout analysis, among other proprietary datasets. For inference, our implementation relies on the onnxruntime [5].

The Docling pipeline feeds page images at 72 dpi resolution, which can be processed on a single CPU with sub-second latency. All predicted bounding-box proposals for document elements are post-processed to remove overlapping proposals based on confidence and size, and then intersected with the text tokens in the PDF to group them into meaningful and complete units such as paragraphs, section titles, list items, captions, figures or tables.

## Table Structure Recognition

The TableFormer model [12], first published in 2022 and since refined with a custom structure token language [9], is a vision-transformer model for table structure recovery. It can predict the logical row and column structure of a given table based on an input image, and determine which table cells belong to column headers, row headers or the table body. Compared to earlier approaches, TableFormer handles many characteristics of tables, such as partial or no borderlines, empty cells, rows or columns, cell spans and hierarchy both on column-heading or row-heading level, tables with inconsistent indentation or alignment and other complexities. For inference, our implementation relies on PyTorch [2].

<!-- page break -->

The Docling pipeline feeds all table objects detected in the layout analysis to the TableFormer model, by providing an image-crop of the table and the included text cells. TableFormer structure predictions are matched back to the PDF cells in post-processing to avoid expensive re-transcription text in the table image. Typical tables require between 2 and 6 seconds to be processed on a standard CPU, strongly depending on the amount of included table cells.

## OCR

Docling provides optional support for OCR, for example to cover scanned PDFs or content in bitmaps images embedded on a page. In our initial release, we rely on EasyOCR [1], a popular thirdparty OCR library with support for many languages. Docling, by default, feeds a high-resolution page image (216 dpi) to the OCR engine, to allow capturing small print detail in decent quality. While EasyOCR delivers reasonable transcription quality, we observe that it runs fairly slow on CPU (upwards of 30 seconds per page).

We are actively seeking collaboration from the open-source community to extend Docling with additional OCR backends and speed improvements.

## 3.3 Assembly

In the final pipeline stage, Docling assembles all prediction results produced on each page into a well-defined datatype that encapsulates a converted document, as defined in the auxiliary package docling-core . The generated document object is passed through a post-processing model which leverages several algorithms to augment features, such as detection of the document language, correcting the reading order, matching figures with captions and labelling metadata such as title, authors and references. The final output can then be serialized to JSON or transformed into a Markdown representation at the users request.

## 3.4 Extensibility

Docling provides a straight-forward interface to extend its capabilities, namely the model pipeline. A model pipeline constitutes the central part in the processing, following initial document parsing and preceding output assembly, and can be fully customized by sub-classing from an abstract baseclass ( BaseModelPipeline ) or cloning the default model pipeline. This effectively allows to fully customize the chain of models, add or replace models, and introduce additional pipeline configuration parameters. To use a custom model pipeline, the custom pipeline class to instantiate can be provided as an argument to the main document conversion methods. We invite everyone in the community to propose additional or alternative models and improvements.

Implementations of model classes must satisfy the python Callable interface. The \_\_call\_\_ method must accept an iterator over page objects, and produce another iterator over the page objects which were augmented with the additional features predicted by the model, by extending the provided PagePredictions data model accordingly.

## 4 Performance

In this section, we establish some reference numbers for the processing speed of Docling and the resource budget it requires. All tests in this section are run with default options on our standard test set distributed with Docling, which consists of three papers from arXiv and two IBM Redbooks, with a total of 225 pages. Measurements were taken using both available PDF backends on two different hardware systems: one MacBook Pro M3 Max, and one bare-metal server running Ubuntu 20.04 LTS on an Intel Xeon E5-2690 CPU. For reproducibility, we fixed the thread budget (through setting OMP NUM THREADS environment variable ) once to 4 (Docling default) and once to 16 (equal to full core count on the test hardware). All results are shown in Table 1.

If you need to run Docling in very low-resource environments, please consider configuring the pypdfium backend. While it is faster and more memory efficient than the default docling-parse backend, it will come at the expense of worse quality results, especially in table structure recovery.

Establishing GPU acceleration support for the AI models is currently work-in-progress and largely untested, but may work implicitly when CUDA is available and discovered by the onnxruntime and

<!-- page break -->

<!-- page break -->

machine learning through dynamic python bytecode transformation and graph compilation. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2 (ASPLOS '24) . ACM, 4 2024. doi: 10.1145/3620665.3640366. URL https://pytorch.org/assets/pytorch2-2.pdf .

- [3] C. Auer, M. Dolfi, A. Carvalho, C. B. Ramis, and P. W. Staar. Delivering document conversion as a cloud service with high throughput and responsiveness. In 2022 IEEE 15th International Conference on Cloud Computing (CLOUD) , pages 363-373. IEEE, 2022.
- [4] J. Berkenbilt. Qpdf: A content-preserving pdf document transformer, 2024. URL https: //github.com/qpdf/qpdf .
- [5] O. R. developers. Onnx runtime. https://onnxruntime.ai/ , 2024. Version: 1.18.1.
- [6] IBM. Data Prep Kit: a community project to democratize and accelerate unstructured data preparation for LLM app developers, 2024. URL https://github.com/IBM/ data-prep-kit .
- [7] A. S. Inc. PyMuPDF, 2024. URL https://github.com/pymupdf/PyMuPDF .
- [8] J. Liu. LlamaIndex, 11 2022. URL https://github.com/jerryjliu/llama\_index .
- [9] M. Lysak, A. Nassar, N. Livathinos, C. Auer, and P. Staar. Optimized Table Tokenization for Table Structure Recognition. In Document Analysis and Recognition - ICDAR 2023: 17th International Conference, San Jos´ e, CA, USA, August 21-26, 2023, Proceedings, Part II , pages 37-50, Berlin, Heidelberg, Aug. 2023. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-031-41678-1. doi: 10. 1007/978-3-031-41679-8 3. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-41679-8\_3 .
- [10] L. Mishra, S. Dhibi, Y. Kim, C. Berrospi Ramis, S. Gupta, M. Dolfi, and P. Staar. Statements: Universal information extraction from tables with large language models for ESG KPIs. In D. Stammbach, J. Ni, T. Schimanski, K. Dutia, A. Singh, J. Bingler, C. Christiaen, N. Kushwaha, V. Muccione, S. A. Vaghefi, and M. Leippold, editors, Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Natural Language Processing Meets Climate Change (ClimateNLP 2024) , pages 193-214, Bangkok, Thailand, Aug. 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.climatenlp-1.15 .
- [11] L. Morin, V. Weber, G. I. Meijer, F. Yu, and P. W. J. Staar. Patcid: an open-access dataset of chemical structures in patent documents. Nature Communications , 15(1):6532, August 2024. ISSN 2041-1723. doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-50779-y. URL https://doi.org/10.1038/ s41467-024-50779-y .
- [12] A. Nassar, N. Livathinos, M. Lysak, and P. Staar. Tableformer: Table structure understanding with transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 4614-4623, 2022.
- [13] B. Pfitzmann, C. Auer, M. Dolfi, A. S. Nassar, and P. Staar. Doclaynet: a large humanannotated dataset for document-layout segmentation. pages 3743-3751, 2022.
- [14] pypdf Maintainers. pypdf: A Pure-Python PDF Library, 2024. URL https://github.com/ py-pdf/pypdf .
- [15] P. Team. PyPDFium2: Python bindings for PDFium, 2024. URL https://github.com/ pypdfium2-team/pypdfium2 .
- [16] Y. Zhao, W. Lv, S. Xu, J. Wei, G. Wang, Q. Dang, Y. Liu, and J. Chen. Detrs beat yolos on real-time object detection, 2023.

<!-- page break -->

<!-- page break -->

<!-- page break -->
